docs/workspace-schema.md, before:

# Workspace Schema Reference

This document describes the `workspace.yaml` schema used by Canopy for workspace metadata.

## Schema Versioning

Workspace metadata files include a version field for forward compatibility. This allows Canopy to:

- Detect and migrate older workspace formats automatically
- Warn about workspaces created by newer versions of Canopy
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing workspaces

## Current Schema (Version 1)

```yaml
version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "feature/PROJ-123"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
  - name: "frontend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/frontend.git"
closed_at: null  # Only present for archived workspaces
```

## Field Reference

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `version` | integer | Yes | Schema version (currently `1`) |
| `id` | string | Yes | Unique workspace identifier |
| `branch_name` | string | No | Git branch name for worktrees |
| `repos` | array | Yes | List of repositories in the workspace |
| `repos[].name` | string | Yes | Repository display name |
| `repos[].url` | string | Yes | Git clone URL |
| `closed_at` | timestamp | No | When the workspace was archived (ISO 8601) |

## Version History

### Version 1 (Current)

- Added `version` field for schema versioning
- No structural changes from version 0

### Version 0 (Legacy)

- Original schema without version field
- Workspaces without a version field are treated as version 0
- Automatically migrated to version 1 on next save

## Migration Behavior

When Canopy loads a workspace:

1. **Missing version**: Treated as version 0 (legacy workspace)
2. **Version 0-1**: Automatically upgraded to current version on save
3. **Future versions**: Warning logged, workspace loaded as-is

### Example: Legacy Workspace (No Version)

```yaml
# Old format (version 0)
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "main"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
```

After any modification, this becomes:

```yaml
# Migrated format (version 1)
version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "main"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
```

## Export Format

When exporting workspaces, the export file uses a slightly different schema optimized for portability.

**Field name differences:**
- Workspace `branch_name` → Export `branch` (shorter, more common naming)

The export file includes:

- `version`: Export format version (string `"1"`)
- `workspace_version`: The workspace schema version (integer)

```yaml
version: "1"
workspace_version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch: "main"
exported_at: "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
    alias: "org/backend"  # Registry alias if available
```

### Export-Only Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `version` | string | Export format version (currently `"1"`) |
| `workspace_version` | integer | Workspace schema version at time of export |
| `branch` | string | Git branch name (maps to `branch_name` in workspace) |
| `exported_at` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp when the workspace was exported |
| `repos[].alias` | string | Registry alias for the repository (if available) |

## Compatibility Notes

- **Forward compatibility**: Canopy can read workspaces from older versions
- **Backward compatibility**: Workspaces saved with newer Canopy versions include the version field
- **Import validation**: Importing workspaces with unsupported future versions is rejected with an error

Commit message:

feat(completion): add shell completion command for bash, zsh, fish, and powershell
refactor(config): remove warnings handling from config output

feat(hooks): add description field to hooks and display it in hook list

docs(configuration): add Git retry settings to configuration documentation

docs(usage): document new lifecycle hooks and shell completion commands

feat(workspace): add setup_incomplete field to workspace schema

feat(logging): implement sensitive data redaction in logs

test(logging): add tests for sensitive data redaction functionality

feat(tui): propose bulk operations for workspace management in TUI

feat(context): add context propagation to internal interfaces for cancellation support

feat(progress): introduce progress indicators for long-running operations

feat(health): add workspace health check command with detailed checks and remediation

docs(health): document workspace health check command and scenarios

feat(health): implement health check logic and CLI command for workspaces

docs/workspace-schema.md, after:

# Workspace Schema Reference

This document describes the `workspace.yaml` schema used by Canopy for workspace metadata.

## Schema Versioning

Workspace metadata files include a version field for forward compatibility. This allows Canopy to:

- Detect and migrate older workspace formats automatically
- Warn about workspaces created by newer versions of Canopy
- Maintain backward compatibility with existing workspaces

## Current Schema (Version 1)

```yaml
version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "feature/PROJ-123"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
  - name: "frontend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/frontend.git"
closed_at: null            # Only present for archived workspaces
setup_incomplete: false    # Only present if template setup commands failed
```

## Field Reference

| Field | Type | Required | Description |
|-------|------|----------|-------------|
| `version` | integer | Yes | Schema version (currently `1`) |
| `id` | string | Yes | Unique workspace identifier |
| `branch_name` | string | No | Git branch name for worktrees |
| `repos` | array | Yes | List of repositories in the workspace |
| `repos[].name` | string | Yes | Repository display name |
| `repos[].url` | string | Yes | Git clone URL |
| `closed_at` | timestamp | No | When the workspace was archived (ISO 8601) |
| `setup_incomplete` | boolean | No | Indicates that template setup commands failed during workspace creation |

### The `setup_incomplete` Field

When a workspace is created with a template that includes `setup_commands`, Canopy runs each command sequentially. If any command fails, `setup_incomplete` is set to `true` in the workspace metadata. This allows you to:

1. Identify workspaces that may need manual intervention
2. Re-run setup commands after fixing the issue
3. Track workspaces with incomplete initialization

To re-run setup for a workspace with incomplete setup:

```bash
# View workspace to check setup_incomplete status
canopy workspace view PROJ-123

# Manually run the setup commands that failed
cd $(canopy workspace view PROJ-123 --print-path)
npm install  # or whatever commands failed
```

## Version History

### Version 1 (Current)

- Added `version` field for schema versioning
- No structural changes from version 0

### Version 0 (Legacy)

- Original schema without version field
- Workspaces without a version field are treated as version 0
- Automatically migrated to version 1 on next save

## Migration Behavior

When Canopy loads a workspace:

1. **Missing version**: Treated as version 0 (legacy workspace)
2. **Version 0-1**: Automatically upgraded to current version on save
3. **Future versions**: Warning logged, workspace loaded as-is

### Example: Legacy Workspace (No Version)

```yaml
# Old format (version 0)
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "main"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
```

After any modification, this becomes:

```yaml
# Migrated format (version 1)
version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch_name: "main"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
```

## Export Format

When exporting workspaces, the export file uses a slightly different schema optimized for portability.

**Field name differences:**
- Workspace `branch_name` → Export `branch` (shorter, more common naming)

The export file includes:

- `version`: Export format version (string `"1"`)
- `workspace_version`: The workspace schema version (integer)

```yaml
version: "1"
workspace_version: 1
id: "PROJ-123"
branch: "main"
exported_at: "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z"
repos:
  - name: "backend"
    url: "https://github.com/org/backend.git"
    alias: "org/backend"  # Registry alias if available
```

### Export-Only Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `version` | string | Export format version (currently `"1"`) |
| `workspace_version` | integer | Workspace schema version at time of export |
| `branch` | string | Git branch name (maps to `branch_name` in workspace) |
| `exported_at` | string | ISO 8601 timestamp when the workspace was exported |
| `repos[].alias` | string | Registry alias for the repository (if available) |

## Compatibility Notes

- **Forward compatibility**: Canopy can read workspaces from older versions
- **Backward compatibility**: Workspaces saved with newer Canopy versions include the version field
- **Import validation**: Importing workspaces with unsupported future versions is rejected with an error
